> Author: Lammaccat
>
> *This essay was originally for the author's English 11 Honors assignment*
>
> June 18, 2020

# Critical Analysis of Mikhail Kalatozov’s I am Cuba

Mikhail Kalatozov's "I Am Cuba" is an excellent poetic film made in 1964. It consists of four vignettes about the lives of the Cuban people during the pre-revolutionary era. Each of the four segments, linked by Spanish poetry read by the "Voice of Cuba," tells the story of tolerance, self-destruction, enlightenment, and revolution. As a Soviet director, he justifies the legitimacy and need of the Cuban Revolution. The film is informative and persuasive.

The film is about why the revolution is necessary to the people in the pre-Castro era by showing the life of them. The main character in the four stories is the people of Cuba -- specifically, are a prostitute, a peasant, a group of student activists, and a father. The theme is history and social classes. The first story focuses on comparing the living conditions of the bourgeoisie and the living conditions of the people at the bottom in Cuba. Many bikini women on the rooftop drink, chat, and frolic in the swimming pool. The rich, white men in the nightclubs drink, dance, and brag. The lovely Maria from the slums, forced by circumstance to be a prostitute, catering to boorish Americans in the nightclubs. A customer steals her crucifix and causes her to have sex with him. The next day, the girl's hidden prostitute identity is revealed to her boyfriend, but the angry boyfriend has no choice because of their poverty. At this point, the poor are helpless. They have no ability or consciousness to resist. The only thing they can do is to tolerate and attach to the bourgeoisie. The second story is about a peasant whose sugar cane farm is sold to United Fruit Co. just at harvest time. This unfair oppression causes the old peasant to burn his crops and their houses in anger. He gives his children his last peso(Cuban money) and sends them to the town before he decides to burn his house. While they are happily drinking their Coke and dancing, the old peasant slashes at the sugar cane and sets fire to his ex-field and ex-house. Then, he falls and dies. Now, the exploited people finally have a desire for resistance, but still, they are only at the stage of self-destruction. In the third story, the resistance is not just by individuals but by a group of people. The rebels print a large number of anti-dictatorships papers to give the people faith and strength to revolt. One of the revolutionary students even tries to assassinate the corrupt police officer. But when he sees the officer having breakfast with his family, he gives up. Ironically, he is murdered by the officer whose life he spared during a protest. Then, tens of thousands of citizens took to the streets, following his body to demonstrate a march. The fourth story is brief. A revolutionary soldier escapes from enemies and hides in a rural house. The soldier tries to persuade the father of the family to join the revolution, but the solider gets rejected and kicked out. After a little while, the government army blows up the host's home when they are trying to bomb the revolutionary army inhabiting the mountains, and even nearly killed his wife and children. Eventually, he makes up his mind to join the revolutionary army on the battlefield and fights with the dictatorship. National revolutionary forces finally form, and they will fight until they and their children are liberated. Along with the director's powerful shots, each of the four stories of different emotional appeals deepens the theme and logic of the former one, making the need of revolution seems more and more urgent. 

The film is informative about the desperation of the Cuban people. By presenting the life of people in the pre-Castro era, the film successfully meets the purpose of justifying the need for revolution. For example, in the first story, Maria is forced by several white customers to dance with them in the nightclubs. While Maira stumbles back and forth between a sugar cane screen, the light and shadow of sugar cane folding screen projects on her face and body. This shaking camera shot allows Maria's inner tolerance and distress to be successfully externalized. The black and white light spots and dance movements here surpasses its entertainment functions and transforms into lens language and body language that presents the release of despair Cuban people at the bottom. The director fully demonstrates the character's difficulty -- feeling helpless of being in a world that is not her own. The tolerance that Maria holds is in great contrast with the viewer's compassion, and it is done by using a beautiful and smooth long take full of "poetic" to show reality. It does not beautify the pain, but carve it deeper. This scene, like the use of pathos in literature, appeals to the audience's emotion because it makes them feel the pain of under the oppression imposed by the bourgeoisie on the people of Cuba. Then, the emotional appeal persuades them to agree with the necessity of overthrowing the old Cuban government, making the director's goal achieved.

Despite presenting the informative stories, the film is also persuasive through its poetic camera language. The third story puts the theme of "Enlightenment" on the table. After entering the city, the camera has a larger scheduling space and movement method, and the reality and humanity depth displayed by it are more Full and vivid. In the scene presenting the struggle of whether the student activist should kill the officer, the director uses the checkered gap in the stone railing. The camera continuously changes the angle and direction, showing the young man's inner struggle the different holes over and over again. In a scene in which the students were arrested, one of the students fell off the balcony. The camera used a tilted overhead shot to show the corpses on the ground and the onlookers in the sky. At the same time, in the picture, the young students' The body was placed in a 卐 shape. The expression technique also adopted a long panoramic lens and tilt composition. From the perspective of the whole film, the emotion of the film has undergone a dramatic turn. The people began to awaken, start to unite, and begin to resist. This fierce confrontation drama became the climax of the film. This complex emotion mixed with national emotions, revolutionary stimulants, and a sense of sacred mission is significantly rendered here, fully released in the next funeral. This is what the director tried his best to use the camera to mobilize the emotions. It is hard not to be moved in those scenes since the director has successfully connected you with the Cuban people. 

In short, the genius director, Mikhail Kalatozov, tries to justify the legitimacy and need of the Cuban Revolution by telling four different stories in *I am Cuba*. The work is both informative and persuasive, one of the best in the 1960s. It is a movie you must watch to understand history.

 